# up4: Universal Post-Processor for Particulate Processes

A fast flexible analysis toolset for particle data of all kinds.

Use it to compare interplatform particle results - either experimental
or synthetic data generated by different platforms like LIGGGHTS, MercuryDPM,
Barracuda and more.

up4 has a python API, which enables it to be easy to use for a wide range of
scientists, but the core of it is implemented in [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/).


## Installation

### __1. HDF5__
One of the main requirements is the HDF5 library. To install the library we recommend using conda

```bash
conda install -c conda-forge hdf5==1.10.4
```

additionally, we recommend installing to export the following environment variables:

```bash
export HDF5_DIR="$CONDA_PREFIX"
```

for more information see  the [hdf5-rust](https://github.com/aldanor/hdf5-rust) instructions
### __2. Rust__
you will need a rust compiler, see:

https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install

Rust dependencies will be installed automatically DURING compilation

### __3. Python__

Download or clone this repository and run:
```bash
    python3 -m pip install -r requirements.txt
```
after the requirements are installed, you can install the package with:

```bash
    python3 -m pip install .
```
this could take some time as it compiles the rust code on your machine.

You can run the tests with:

```bash
    python3 -m pytest tests/tets-all.py
```




## To Do
### Tests
- test failiures. make exceptations work
- make paths work also when pytested from different folder
- new, better and smaller test datasets
- tets converter::convertertools:{interpolate, velocity}

## Ideas
-  save_constraints --> save the current particle selector constraints in the hdf5 file if file contains constraints, load them in Selector, however warn the user while loading, also make a reverse function to set selector to default state ( data.selector_default or similar)
-  Align grids for comparison. Use some smart metric to align two grids and make diffs/or Hanquiao plots
-  Statistics, is my data good enough? (how many traj do i need per cell to get good data)
-  Data manipulation --> Rotate, translate system(with backup)
-



## Bugs
- bug in interpolator for csv files? there are zeros in 3u_HD1_glass